---
title: Synthetic datasets and community tools for the rapid testing of ecological hypotheses
short: Synthetic macroecological data
csl: /home/tpoisot/.pandoc/styles/oikos.csl
bibliography: /home/tpoisot/.pandoc/default.bib
author:
  - family: Poisot
    given: Timothée
    affiliation: 1, 2
    email: tim@poisotlab.io
  - family: Gravel
    given: Dominique
    affiliation: 2,3
  - family: Leroux
    given: Shawn
    affiliation: 4
  - family: Wood
    given: Spencer A.
    affiliation: 5, 6
  - family: Fortin
    given: Marie-Josée
    affiliation: 7
  - family: Baiser
    given: Benjamin
    affiliation: 8
  - family: Cirtwill
    given: Alyssa R.
    affiliation: 9
  - family: Araújo
    given: Miguel B.
    affiliation: 10
  - family: Stouffer
    given: Daniel B.
    affiliation: 9
affiliation:
  - id: 1
    text: Université de Montréal, Département de Sciences Biologiques, 90 Avenue Vincent d'Indy, Montréal, QC, CAN, H2V3S9
  - id: 2
    text: Québec Centre for Biodiversity Sciences, 1205 Dr. Penfield Avenue, Montréal, QC, CAN, H3A1B1
  - id: 3
    text: Université du Québec à Rimouski, Département de Biologie, 300 Allée des Ursulines, Rimouski, QC, CAN, G5L3A1
  - id: 4
    text: Memorial University of Newfoundland, Department of Biology, 232 Elizabeth Ave, St. John's, NL, CAN, A1B3X9
  - id: 5
    text: Woods Institute for the Environment, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
  - id: 6
    text: School for Environmental and Forest Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
  - id: 7
    text: University of Toronto, Department of Ecology & Evolutionary Biology, 25 Harbord Street, Toronto, ON, CAN, M5S3G5
  - id: 8
    text: University of Florida, Department of Wildlife, Ecology & Conservation, Gainseville, FL, USA
  - id: 9
    text: Centre for Integrative Ecology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Christchurch, New Zealand
  - id: 10
    text: Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales, CSIC, C/ José Gutiérrez Abascal 2, Madrid 28006, España
keyword:
  - k: open data
  - k: API
  - k: species distributions
  - k: computational ecology
  - k: trophic interactions
figure:
  - id: network
    caption: Visual representation of the initial data. On the left, we show the food web (original data and interactions from GLOBI), with genera forming modules (clusters of densely connected nodes) in different colors. On the right, we show the occurrence data where each dot represents one observation from BISON and GBIF (again color coded by module).
    file: figures/figure1.png
    wide: true
  - id: maps
    caption: Maps for the number of genera, number of interactions, and connectance in the assembled networks (on the left) as well as their underlying relationship with latitude (on the right). The tropics are shaded in light yellow. The average value of each output has been (i) averaged across latitudes and (ii) z-score transformed; this emphasizes variations across the gradient as opposed to absolute values (which is a more conservative way of looking at the results since the predictions are qualitative).
    file: figures/figure2.pdf
    wide: true
date: work in progress
abstract: The increased availability of both open ecological data, and software to interact with it, allows the fast collection and integration of information at all spatial and taxonomic scales. This offers the opportunity to address macroecological questions in a cost-effective way. In this contribution, we illustrate this approach by forecasting the structure of a stream food web at the global scale. In so doing, we highlight the most salient issues needing to be addressed before this approach can be used with a high degree of confidence.
---

Ecologists are often asked to provide information and guidance to solve a
variety of issues, across different scales. As part of the global biodiversity
crisis, notable examples include predicting the consequences of the loss of
trophic structure [@este11], rapid shifts in species distributions [@gilm10],
and increased anthropogenic stress on species and their environment. Most of
these pressing issues require the integration of a variety of ecological data
and information, spanning different geographical and environmental scales, to be
properly addressed [@thui13]. Because of these requirements, relying solely on
*de novo* sampling of the ecological systems of interests is not a viable
solution on its own. Chiefly, there are no global funding mechanisms available
to finance systematic sampling of biological data, and the spatial and temporal
scales required to acquire meaningful data on biodiversity change are such that
it would take a long time before realistic data would be available to support
the decision process. While that data collection must continue, we propose that
there are a large number of macroecological questions that could be addressed
without additional data or with data acquired at minimal cost, by making use of
open data and community-developed software and platforms.

Existing datasets can, to an increasing extent, be used to *build* new datasets
(henceforth *synthetic* datasets, since they represent the synthesis of several
types of data). There are several parallel advances that make this approach
possible. First, the volume of data on ecological systems that are available
*openly* increases on a daily basis. This includes point-occurrence data (as in
GBIF or BISON), but also taxonomic knowledge (through ITIS, NCBI or EOL) or
trait and interactions data. In fact, there is a vast (and arguably
under-exploited) amount of ecological information, that is now available without
having to contact and secure authorization from every contributor individually.
Second, these data are often available in a *programmatic* way; as opposed to
manually visiting data repositories, and downloading or copy-and-pasting
datasets, several software packages offer the opportunity to query these
databases automatically, considerably speeding up the data collection process.
As opposed to manual collection, identification, and maintenance of datasets,
most of these services implement web APIs (Application Programming Interface,
*i.e.* services that allow users to query and/or upload data in a standard
format). These services can be queried, either once or on a regular basis, to
retrieve records with the desired properties. This ensures that the process is
repeatable, testable, transparent, and (as long as the code is properly written)
nearly error proof. Finally, most of the heavy lifting for these tasks can be
done through a *burgeoning ecosystem of packages and software* that handles
query formatting, data retrieval, and associated tasks, all the while exposing
simple interfaces to researchers. None of these are *new* data, in the sense
that these collections represent the aggregation of thousands of ecological
studies; the originality lies in the ability to query, aggregate, curate, and
use these data consistently and in a new way using open solutions.

Hypothesis testing for large-scale systems is inherently limited by the
availability of suitable datasets -- most data collection results in small
scale, local data, and it is not always clear how these can be used at more
global scales. Perhaps as a result, developments in macroecology have primarily
been driven by a search for patterns that are very broad both in scale and
nature [@beck12c; @keit12]. While it is obvious that collecting exhaustive data
at scales that are large enough to be relevant can be an insurmountable effort
(because of the monetary, time, and human costs needed), we suggest that
macroecologists could, in parallel, build on existing databases, and aggregate
them in a way that allows direct testing of proposals stemming from theory. To
us, this opens no less than a new way for ecologists to ask critical research
questions, spanning from the local to the global, and from the organismal to the
ecosystemic, scales. Here, we (i) outline approaches for integrating data from a
variety of sources (both in terms of provenance, and type of ecological
information), (ii) identify technical bottlenecks, (iii) discuss issues related
to scientific ethics and best practice, and (iv) provide clear recommendations
moving forward with these approaches at larger scales. Although we illustrate
the principles and proposed approaches with a real-life example, the objective
of this paper is to highlight the way different tools can be integrated in a
single study, and to discuss the current limitations of this approach. This
approach can, for example, prove particularly fruitful if it allows to either
offer new interpretation of well-described macroecological relationships, or to
provide test of hypotheses coming from theoretical work.

# An illustrative case-study

Food-web data, that is the determination of trophic interactions among species,
are notoriously difficult to collect. The usual approach is to assemble
literature data, expert knowledge, and additional information coming from field
work, either as direct observation of feeding events or through gut-content
analysis. Because of these technical constraints, food-web data are most often
assembled based on sampling in a single location. This prevents an adequate
description of the variation of food web structure over space besides by
comparing systems that may be composed of different taxa. As a consequence, most
of the properties of food web over large (continental, global) spatial extents
remain undocumented. For example, what is the relationship between latitude and
connectance (the density of feeding interactions)? One possible way to approach
this question is to collect data from different localities, and document the
relationship between latitude and connectance through regressions. The approach
we illustrate uses broad-scale data integration to forecast the structure of a
single system at the global scale. We are interested in predicting the structure
of a pine-marsh food web, worldwide.

## Interactions data

The food-web data were taken from @thom03, as made available in the `IWDB`
database
([https://www.nceas.ucsb.edu/interactionweb/html/thomps_towns.html][iwdb]) --
starting from the `Martins` dataset (stream food web from a pine forest in
Maine). Wetlands and other freshwater ecosystems are critically endangered and
serve as a home to a host of endemic biodiversity [@fens11; @minc13]. Stream
food webs in particular are important because they provide coupling between
terrestrial and aquatic communities, ensure the maintenance of ecosystem
services, and because the increased pressure on wetlands makes them particularly
threatened. They represent a prime example of ecosystems for which data-driven
prediction can be used to generate scenarios at a temporal scale relevant for
conservation decisions, and faster than what sampling could allow.

[iwdb]: https://www.nceas.ucsb.edu/interactionweb/html/thomps_towns.html

!{network}

The data comprising the original food web (105 nodes, including vague
denominations like *Unidentified detritus* or *Terrestrial invertebrates*), were
cleaned in the following way. First, all nodes were aggregated to the *genus*
level. Due to high level of structure in trophic interactions emerging from
taxonomic rank alone [@eklo11; @stou12], aggregating to the genus level has the
double advantage of (i) removing ambiguities on the identification of species
and (ii) allowing integrating data when any two species from given genera
interact. Second, all nodes that were not identified (`Unidentified` or
`Unknown` in the original data) were removed. The cleaned network documented 227
interactions, between 80 genera.

We then used the name-checking functions from the `taxize` package [@cham13a] to
perform the following steps. First, all names were resolved, and one of the
following was applied: valid names were conserved, invalid names with a close
replacement were corrected, and invalid names with no replacement were removed.
In most situations, invalid names were typos in the spelling of valid ones.
After this step, 74 genera with 189 interactions remained, representing a high
quality genus-level food-web from the original sampling.

Because this food web was sampled *locally*, there is the possibility that
interactions between genera are not reported; either because species from these
genera do not interact or do not co-occur in the sampling location. To
circumvent this, we queried the *GLOBI* database [@poel14] for each genus name,
and retrieved all *feeding* interactions. For all *new* genera retrieved through
this method, we also retrieved their interactions with genera already in the
network. The inflated network (original data plus data from *GLOBI*) has 368
genera, and a total of 4796 interactions between them.

As a final step, we queried the GBIF taxonomic rank database with each of these
(tentatively) genera names. Every tentative genus that was either not found, or
whose taxonomic level was not *genus*, was removed from the network.

The code to reproduce this analysis is in the `1_get_data.r` suppl. file.

## Occurrence data and filtering

For each genus, we retrieved the known occurrences {++(approx. $2\times
10^5$)++} from GBIF and BISON. {--The download yielded over 200000
point-occurence data.--} Because the ultimate goal is to perform spatial
modeling of the structure of the network, we removed genera for which fewer than
100 occurrences were known. This seems like a stringent filter, yet it enables
us (i) to maintain sufficient predictive powers for SDMs, and (ii) to only work
on the genera for which we have "high-quality" data. The cleaned food web had a
total of 134 genera and 782 interactions, for 118269 presences. Given the
curated publicly available data, it represents the current best description of
feeding interactions between species of this ecosystem. A visual depiction of
the network is given in \autoref{network}.

On its own, the fact that filtering for genera with over 100 records reduced the
sample size from 368 genera to 134 indicates how crucial it is that all
observations are reported in public databases. This is because the type of
analysis we present here, although cost-effective and enabling rapid evaluation
of different scenarios, is only as good as the underlying data. Since most
modeling tools require a minimal sample size in order to achieve acceptable
accuracy, concerted efforts by the community and funding agencies to ensure that
the minimal amount of data is deposited upon publication or acquisition is
needed. It must also be noted that the threshold of a 100 occurrences is an
arbitrary one.

The approach is amenable to sensitivity analysis, and indeed this will be a
crucial component of future analyses. A taxon can have less observations than
the threshold either because of under-sampling or under-reporting, or because it
is naturally rare. In the context of food webs, species higher-up the food chain
can be less common than primary producers. To which extent these relationships
between, *e.g.*, trophic position and rarity, can influence the predictions,
will have to receive attention.

The code to reproduce this analysis is in the `1_get_data.r` suppl. file.

## Species Distribution Model

For each species in this subset of data, we retrieved the nineteen `bioclim`
variables [@hijm05], with a resolution of 5 arc-minutes. This enabled us to
build climatic envelope models for each species. These models tend to be more
conservative than alternate modeling strategies, in that they predict smaller
range sizes [@hijm06], but they also perform well overall for presence-only data
[@elit06]. The output of these models is, for species $i$, the probability of an
observation $\mathrm{P}(i)$ within each pixel. We appreciate that this is a
coarse analysis, but its purpose is only to highlight how the different data can
be combined. A discussion of the limitations of this approach is given below.

The code to reproduce this analysis is in the `2_get_sdm.r` suppl. file.

## Assembly

For every interactions in the food web, we estimated the probability of it being
observed in each pixel as the product of the probabilities of observing each
species on its own: $\mathrm{P}(L_{ij}) \propto \mathrm{P}(i)\mathrm{P}(j)$.
This resulted in one LDM ("link distribution model") for each interaction. It
should be noted that co-occurrence is considered to be entirely neutral, in that
we assume that the probability that two species co-occur is independent (*i.e.*
a predator is not more likely to be present if there are, or are not, potential
preys). We also assume no variability in interactions, as in @have92. It is
likely that, in addition to their occurrence, species co-occurrences and
interactions [@pois15a] are affected by climate. Whether or not these constitute
acceptable assumptions has to be decided for each study.

!{maps}

The code to reproduce this analysis is in the `3_get_ldm.r` suppl. file.

Based on this information, we generated example illustrations (using
`4_draw_figures.r` -- Figure 2). The system is characterized, at the world-wide
scale, by an increased number of genera *and* interactions in temperate areas,
with diversity and interaction hotspots in Western Europe, North-East and
South-Atlantic America, and the western coasts of New Zealand and Australia --
this is clearly symmetrical along the equator. Network structure, here measured
by network connectance, follows a different trend than genera richness or
interactions do. Connectance is, overall, stable along the gradient, with a
decline only at higher latitudes.

# Challenges moving forward

The example provided illustrates the promises of data-driven approaches. It
builds on new data availability, new statistical and computational tools, and
new ways to integrate both. Most importantly, it allows to use "classical"
ecological data in a resolutely novel way, thus presenting an important
opportunity to bridge a gap between field-based and theory-based macroecological
research. But as with every methodological advancement, comes a number of
challenges and limitations. Here we discuss a few we believe are important. In
doing so, we hope to define these issues and emphasize that each of them, on
their own, should be the subject of further discourse.

### Attribution stacking and intellectual provenance

The merging of large databases has already created a conflict of how to properly
attribute data provenance. Here there are at least two core issues that will
require community consultation in order to be resolved. First, *what is the
proper mode of attribution when a very large volume of data are aggregated*?
Second, *what should be the intellectual property of the synthetic dataset*?
Currently, citations (whether to articles or datasets) are only counted when
they are part of the main text. The simple example outlined here relies on well
over a thousand references, and it makes little sense to expect that they would
be provided in the main text (nor do we expect any journal to accept a
manuscript with over a hundred references or so). One intermediate solution
would be to collate these references in a supplement, but it is unclear that
these would be counted, and therefore contribute to the *impact* of each
individual dataset. This is a problem that we argue is best solved by
publishers; proper attribution and credit is key to provide incentives to data
release [@whel14; @kena14]. As citations are currently the "currency" of
scientific impact, publishers have a responsibility not only to ensure that data
are available (which many already do), but that they are recognized; data
citation, no matter how many data are cited, is a way to achieve this goal. The
synthetic dataset, on the other hand, can reasonably be understood as a novel
product; there is technical and intellectual effort involved in producing it,
and although it is a derivative work, we would encourage authors to deposit it
anew.

### Sharing of code and analysis pipeline

Ideally, authors should release their analysis *pipeline* (that is, the series
of steps, represented by code, needed to reproduce the analysis starting from a
new dataset) in addition to the data and explanation of the steps. The pipeline
can take the form of a `makefile` (which allows one to generate the results,
from the raw data, without human intervention), or be all of the relevant code
that allows to re-generate the figures and results. For example, we have
released all of the `R` code that was used to generate the figures at
{==will be given upon acceptance==}. Sharing the analysis pipeline has several advantages.
First, it is a first step towards ensuring the quality of analyses, since
reviewers can (and should reasonably be expected to) look at the source code.
Second, it provides a *template* for future analyses -- instead of re-developing
the pipeline from scratch, authors can re-use (and acknowledge) the previous
code base and build on it. Finally, it helps identifying areas of future
improvement. The development of software should primarily aim to make the work
of researchers easier. Looking at commonalities in the analytical pipelines for
which no ready-made solutions exists will be a great way to influence priorities
in software development. Properly citing and reviewing computer code is still an
issue, because software evolves whereas papers remain (for now) frozen in the
state where they were published. Being more careful with citation, notably by
including version number [@whit15] or using unique identifiers [@pois15c], will
help long-term reproducibility.

### Computational literacy

This approach hardly qualifies as *big data*; nevertheless, it relies on the
management and integration of a large volume of heterogeneous information, both
qualitatively larger than the current "norm". The first challenge is being able
to *manage* this data; it requires data management skills that are not usually
needed when the scale of the dataset is small, and, fallible though the process
may be, when data can reasonably be inspected manually. The second challenge is
being able to *manipulate* these data; even within the context of this simple
use-case, the data do not fit in the memory of `R` (arguably the most commonly
known and used software in ecology) without some adjustments. Once these issues
were overcome, running the analysis involved a few hours worth of computation
time. Computational approaches are going to become increasingly common in
ecology [@hamp13], and are identified by the community as both in-demand skills
and as not receiving enough attention in current ecological curricula [@barr13a]
It seems that efforts should be allocated to raise the computational literacy of
ecologists, and recognize that there is value in the diversity of tools one can
use to carry out more demanding studies. For example, both `Python` and `Julia`
are equally as user friendly as `R` while also being more powerful and better
suited for computationally- or memory-intensive analyses.

### Standards and best practices

In conducting this analysis, we noticed that a common issue was the
identification of species and genera. All of these datasets were deposited by
individual scientists; whether we like it or not, individuals are prone to
failure in a very different way than the "Garbage in, garbage out" idea that
applies to computer programs. Using tools such as `taxize` [@cham13a] can allow
us to resolve a few of the uncertainties, yet this must be done every time the
data are queried and requires the end user to make educated guesses as to what
the "true" identity of the species is. These limitations can be overcome, on two
conditions. Database maintainers should implement automated curation of the data
they have the stewardship of, and identify potential mistakes and correct them
upstream, so that users download high-quality, high-reliability data. Data
contributors should rely more extensively on biodiversity identifiers (such as
TSN, GBIF, NCBI Taxonomy ID, etc.), to make sure that even when there are typos
in the species name, they can be matched across datasets. Constructing this
dataset highlighted a fundamental issue: the rate-limiting step is rarely the
availability of appropriate tools or platforms, but instead it is the adoption
of common standards and the publication of data in a way that conforms to them.
In addition, @mald15 emphasize that point-occurence data are not always properly
reported -- for example, the center of a country or region can be used when no
other information is known; this requires an improved dialogue between data
collectors and data curators, to highlight which practices have the highest risk
of biasing future analyses.

### Propagation of error

There are always caveats to using synthetic datasets. First, the extent to which
each component dataset is adequately sampled is unknown (although there exist
ways to assess the overall representativeness of the assembled dataset;
@schm14). This can create gaps in the information that is available when all
component datasets are being merged.  Second, because it is unlikely that all
component datasets were acquired using reconcilable standards and protocol, it
is likely that much of the quantitative information needs be discarded, and
therefore the conservative position is to do qualitative analyses only. Although
these have to be kept in mind, we do not think they are so sufficient as to prevent use and
evaluation of the approach we suggest. For one thing, as we illustrate, at large
spatial and organizational scales, coarse- grained analyses are still able to
pick up qualitative differences in community structure. Second, most emergent
properties are relatively insensitive to fine- scale error; for example, @grav13
show that even though a simple statistical model of food-web structure
mispredicts some individual interactions, it produces communities with realistic
emergent properties. Which level of error is acceptable needs to be determined
for each application, but we argue that the use of synthetic datasets is a
particularly cost- and time-effective approach for broad-scale description of
community-level measures.

# Conclusion -- why not?

In light of the current limitations and challenges, one might be tempted to
question the ultimate validity and utility of this approach. Yet there are
several strong arguments, that should not be overlooked, in favor of it use. As
we demonstrate with this example, synthetic datasets allow us to rapidly
generate qualitative predictions at large scales. These can, for example, serve
as a basis to forecast the effect of scenarios of climate change on community
properties [@albo14]. Perhaps more importantly, synthetic datasets will be
extremely efficient at identifying gaps in our knowledge of biological systems:
either because there is high uncertainty or sensitivity to choices in the model
output, or because there is no available information to incorporate in these
models. By building these datasets, it will be easier to assess the extent of
our knowledge of biodiversity, and to identify areas or taxa of higher priority
for sampling. For this reason, using synthetic datasets is *not* a call to do
less field-based science. Quite the contrary: in addition to highlighting areas
of high uncertainty, synthetic datasets provide *predictions* that require
field-based validation. Only through this feedback can we build enough
confidence in this approach to apply it for more ambitious questions, or
disqualify it altogether. Meanwhile, the use of synthetic datasets will
necessitate the development of both statistical methodology and software; this
is one of the required steps towards real-time use and analysis of ecological
data [@anto14]. We appreciate that this approach currently comes with some
limitations -- they are unlikely to be overcome except with increased use,
testing, and validation. Since the community already built effective and
user-friendly databases and tools, there is very little cost (both in time and
in funding) in trying these methods and there is also the promise of great
potential.

**Acknowledgments --** This work was funded in part through a grant from the
Canadian Institute of Ecology and Evolution. TP was funded by a Starting grant
from the Université de Montréal, and a NSERC Discovery Grant. SL was funded by
a NSERC Discovery Grant. DBS acknowledges a Marsden Fund Fast-Start grant
(UOC-1101) and Rutherford Discovery Fellowship, both administered by the Royal
Society of New Zealand. We thank Kévin Cazelles for constructive comments on
the manuscript. We thank Anne Bruneau and Andrew Gonzalez for organizing the
workshop at which this approach was first discussed. We thank Ross Mounce and
one anonymous reviewer for comments on the manuscript.

# References
